1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Sep 6;9(9):CD001127. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001127.pub4.

Dornase alfa for cystic fibrosis.

Yang C(1), Montgomery M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine, BC Children's 
Hospital, 4480 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6H 3V4.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Apr 04;4:CD001127.

BACKGROUND: Dornase alfa is currently used as a mucolytic to treat pulmonary 
disease (the major cause of morbidity and mortality) in cystic fibrosis. It 
reduces mucus viscosity in the lungs, promoting improved clearance of 
secretions. This is an update of a previously published review.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the use of dornase alfa in cystic fibrosis is 
associated with improved mortality and morbidity compared to placebo or other 
medications that improve airway clearance, and to identify any adverse events 
associated with its use.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders 
Group Trials Register which comprises references identified from comprehensive 
electronic database searches, handsearching relevant journals and abstracts from 
conferences. Date of the most recent search of the Group's Cystic Fibrosis 
Register: 23 April 2018.Clinicaltrials.gov and the International Clinical Trials 
Registry Platform were also searched to identify unpublished or ongoing trials. 
Date of most recent search: 07 June 2018.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials 
comparing dornase alfa to placebo, standard therapy or other medications that 
improve airway clearance.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Authors independently assessed trials against the 
inclusion criteria; two authors carried out analysis of methodological quality 
and data extraction. GRADE was used to assess the level of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: The searches identified 69 trials, of which 19 (2565 participants) 
met our inclusion criteria. Fifteen trials compared dornase alfa to placebo or 
no dornase alfa (2447 participants); two compared daily dornase to hypertonic 
saline (32 participants); one compared daily dornase alfa to hypertonic saline 
and alternate day dornase alfa (48 participants); one compared dornase alfa to 
mannitol and the combination of both drugs (38 participants). Trial duration 
varied from six days to three years.Dornase alfa compared to placebo or no 
treatmentDornase alfa improved forced expiratory volume at one second at one 
month (four trials, 248 participants), three months (one trial, 320 
participants; moderate-quality evidence), six months (one trial, 647 
participants; high-quality evidence) and two years (one trial, 410 
participants). Limited low-quality evidence showed no difference between groups 
for changes in quality of life. There was a decrease in pulmonary exacerbations 
with dornase alfa in trials of up to two years (moderate-quality evidence). One 
trial that examined the cost of care, including the cost of dornase alfa, found 
that the cost savings from dornase alfa offset 18% to 38% of the medication 
costs.Dornase alfa: daily versus alternate dayOne cross-over trial (43 children) 
found no differences between treatment regimens for lung function, quality of 
life or pulmonary exacerbations (low-quality evidence).Dornase alfa compared to 
other medications that improve airway clearanceResults for these comparisons 
were mixed. One trial (43 children) showed a greater improvement in forced 
expiratory volume at one second for dornase alfa compared to hypertonic saline 
(low-quality evidence), and one trial (23 participants) reported no difference 
in lung function between dornase alfa and mannitol or dornase alfa and dornase 
alfa plus mannitol (low-quality evidence). One trial (23 participants) found a 
difference in quality of life favouring dornase alfa when compared to dornase 
alfa plus mannitol (low-quality evidence); other comparisons found no difference 
in this outcome (low-quality evidence). No trials in any comparison reported any 
difference between groups in the number of pulmonary exacerbations (low-quality 
evidence).When all comparisons are assessed, dornase alfa did not cause 
significantly more adverse effects than other treatments, except voice 
alteration and rash.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is evidence to show that, compared with placebo, 
therapy with dornase alfa improves lung function in people with cystic fibrosis 
in trials lasting from one month to two years. There was a decrease in pulmonary 
exacerbations in trials of six months or longer. Voice alteration and rash 
appear to be the only adverse events reported with increased frequency in 
randomised controlled trials. There is not enough evidence to firmly conclude if 
dornase alfa is superior to other hyperosmolar agents in improving lung 
function.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001127.pub4
PMCID: PMC6513278
PMID: 30187450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Connie Yang has received support from 
Novartis to attend the Killarney Cystic Fibrosis Meeting in 2014 and the 
Pediatric Advisory Board. Dr. Montgomery has no conflicts of interest.


2. Respirology. 2017 Aug;22(6):1084-1092. doi: 10.1111/resp.13047. Epub 2017 Apr 
11.

Mucoactive agents for chronic, non-cystic fibrosis lung disease: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Tarrant BJ(1)(2), Le Maitre C(1), Romero L(3), Steward R(1), Button BM(1)(4), 
Thompson BR(4)(5), Holland AE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Nutrition and Sport, La Trobe University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Ian Potter Library, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Allergy, Immunology and Respiratory Medicine (AIRmed), Monash 
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Allergy, Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, Alfred Health, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Inhaled mucoactive agents are used in respiratory disease to improve mucus 
properties and enhance secretion clearance. The effect of mannitol, recombinant 
human deoxyribonuclease/dornase alfa (rhDNase) and hypertonic saline (HS) or 
normal saline (NS) are not well described in chronic lung conditions other than 
cystic fibrosis (CF). The aim of this review was to determine the benefit and 
safety of inhaled mucoactive agents outside of CF. We searched Medline, Embase, 
CINAHL and CENTRAL for randomized controlled trials investigating the effects of 
mucoactive agents on lung function, adverse events (AEs), health-related quality 
of life (HRQOL), hospitalization, length of stay, exacerbations, sputum 
clearance and inflammation. There were detrimental effects of rhDNase in 
bronchiectasis, with average declines of 1.9-4.3% in forced expiratory volume in 
1 s (FEV1 ) and 3.7-5.4% in forced vital capacity (FVC) (n = 410, two studies), 
and increased exacerbation risk (relative risk = 1.35, 95% CI = 1.01-1.79 
n = 349, one study). Some participants exhibited a reduction in FEV1 (≥10-15%) 
with mucoactive agents on screening (mannitol = 158 of 1051 participants, 
rhDNase = 2 of 30, HS = 3 of 80). Most AEs were mild and transient, including 
bronchospasm, cough and breathlessness. NS eased symptomatic burden in COPD, 
while NS and HS improved spirometry, HRQOL and sputum burden in non-CF 
bronchiectasis. Mannitol improved mucociliary clearance in asthma and 
bronchiectasis, while the effects of N-acetylcysteine were unclear. In chronic 
lung diseases outside CF, there are small benefits of mannitol, NS and HS. 
Adverse effects of rhDNase suggest this should not be administered in non-CF 
bronchiectasis.

© 2017 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13047
PMID: 28397992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Feb 9;2(2):CD008649. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008649.pub3.

Inhaled mannitol for cystic fibrosis.

Nevitt SJ(1), Thornton J, Murray CS, Dwyer T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Block F, Waterhouse 
Building, 1-5 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool, UK, L69 3GL.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 May 1;5:CD008649.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Oct 09;(10):CD008649.

BACKGROUND: Several agents are used to clear secretions from the airways of 
people with cystic fibrosis. Mannitol increases mucociliary clearance, but its 
exact mechanism of action is unknown. The dry powder formulation of mannitol may 
be more convenient and easier to use compared with established agents which 
require delivery via a nebuliser. Phase III trials of inhaled dry powder 
mannitol for the treatment of cystic fibrosis have been completed and it is now 
available in Australia and some countries in Europe. This is an update of a 
previous review.
OBJECTIVES: To assess whether inhaled dry powder mannitol is well tolerated, 
whether it improves the quality of life and respiratory function in people with 
cystic fibrosis and which adverse events are associated with the treatment.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders 
Group Trials Register which comprises references identified from comprehensive 
electronic databases, handsearching relevant journals and abstracts from 
conferences.Date of last search: 28 September 2017.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled studies comparing mannitol with 
placebo, active inhaled comparators (for example, hypertonic saline or dornase 
alfa) or with no treatment.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Authors independently assessed studies for 
inclusion, carried out data extraction and assessed the risk of bias in included 
studies. The quality of the evidence was assessed using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: Six studies (reported in 50 publications) were included with a 
total of 784 participants.Duration of treatment in the included studies ranged 
from 12 days to six months, with open-label treatment for an additional six 
months in two of the studies. Five studies compared mannitol with control (a 
very low dose of mannitol or non-respirable mannitol) and the final study 
compared mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus dornase alfa. Two 
large studies had a similar parallel design and provided data for 600 
participants, which could be pooled where data for a particular outcome and time 
point were available. The remaining studies had much smaller sample sizes 
(ranging from 22 to 95) and data could not be pooled due to differences in 
design, interventions and population.Pooled evidence from the two large parallel 
studies was judged to be of low to moderate quality and from the smaller studies 
was judged to be of low to very low quality. In all studies, there was an 
initial test to see if participants tolerated mannitol, with only those who 
could tolerate the drug being randomised; therefore, the study results are not 
applicable to the cystic fibrosis population as a whole.While the published 
papers did not provide all the data required for our analysis, additional 
unpublished data were provided by the drug's manufacturer and the author of one 
of the studies.Pooling the large parallel studies comparing mannitol to control, 
up to and including six months, lung function (forced expiratory volume at one 
second) measured in both mL and % predicted was significantly improved in the 
mannitol group compared to the control group (moderate-quality evidence). 
Beneficial results were observed in these studies in adults and in both 
concomitant dornase alfa users and non-users in these studies. In the smaller 
studies, statistically significant improvements in lung function were also 
observed in the mannitol groups compared to the non-respirable mannitol groups; 
however, we judged this evidence to be of low to very low quality.For the 
comparisons of mannitol and control, we found no consistent differences in 
health-related quality of life in any of the domains except for burden of 
treatment, which was less for mannitol up to four months in the two pooled 
studies of a similar design; this difference was not maintained at six months. 
It should be noted that the tool used to measure health-related quality of life 
was not designed to assess mucolytics and pooling of the age-appropriate tools 
(as done in some of the included studies) may not be valid so results were 
judged to be low to very low quality and should be interpreted with caution. 
Cough, haemoptysis, bronchospasm, pharyngolaryngeal pain and post-tussive 
vomiting were the most commonly reported side effects in both treatment groups. 
Where rates of adverse events could be compared, statistically no significant 
differences were found between mannitol and control groups; although some of 
these events may have clinical relevance for people with CF.For the comparisons 
of mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus dornase alfa, very 
low-quality evidence from a 12-week cross-over study of 28 participants showed 
no statistically significant differences in the recorded domains of 
health-related quality of life or measures of lung function. Cough was the most 
common side effect in the mannitol alone arm but there was no occurrence of 
cough in the dornase alfa alone arm and the most commonly reported reason of 
withdrawal from the mannitol plus dornase alfa arm was pulmonary 
exacerbations.In terms of secondary outcomes of the review (pulmonary 
exacerbations, hospitalisations, symptoms, sputum microbiology), evidence 
provided by the included studies was more limited. For all comparisons, no 
consistent statistically significant and clinically meaningful differences were 
observed between mannitol and control treatments (including dornase alfa).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is moderate-quality evidence to show that treatment 
with mannitol over a six-month period is associated with an improvement in some 
measures of lung function in people with cystic fibrosis compared to control. 
There is low to very low-quality evidence suggesting no difference in quality of 
life for participants taking mannitol compared to control. This review provides 
very low-quality evidence suggesting no difference in lung function or quality 
of life comparing mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus dornase 
alfa.The clinical implications from this review suggest that mannitol could be 
considered as a treatment in cystic fibrosis; but further research is required 
in order to establish who may benefit most and whether this benefit is sustained 
in the longer term. Furthermore, studies comparing its efficacy against other 
(established) mucolytic therapies need to be undertaken before it can be 
considered for mainstream practice.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008649.pub3
PMCID: PMC6491147
PMID: 29424930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sarah Nevitt has no potential conflict of 
interest to declare. Dr Murray was local principal investigator (and thus 
recruiting participants) for an inhaled mannitol study run by Pharmaxis. Her 
institution was paid on a per‐participant basis for participants recruited to 
the study, but she herself did not benefit financially for running the study. Dr 
Thornton was pharmacist at one site for a clinical study of inhaled mannitol in 
children and young people with CF in the UK. Dr Thornton’s main employment is 
with NICE, Centre for Guidelines. NICE Centre for Health Technology Evaluation, 
have published an appraisal of mannitol in CF. The Centre for Guidelines have 
published a guideline for the management of CF which includes mannitol. Dr 
Thornton is also a member of the GRADE working group. Tiffany Dwyer declares she 
has worked on a trial of hypertonic saline in people with cystic fibrosis and 
another trial in non‐cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Hypertonic saline is a 
mucolytic agent that works similarly to inhaled mannitol.


4. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2017 Feb;11(2):129-145. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2017.1280399. Epub 2017 Jan 20.

Adherence to therapies in cystic fibrosis: a targeted literature review.

Narayanan S(1), Mainz JG(2), Gala S(1), Tabori H(2), Grossoehme D(3).

Author information:
(1)a Market Access Solutions LLC. (MKTXS) , Raritan , NJ , USA.
(2)b Cystic Fibrosis Center for Children and Adults, Jena University Hospital , 
Jena , Germany.
(3)c Division of Pulmonary Medicine , Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center , Cincinnati , OH , USA.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening condition with no cure. Available 
therapies relieving the symptoms of CF are complex and time-consuming. A 
comprehensive review assessing adherence to different CF therapies, association 
of adherence with outcomes, and factors influencing adherence could inform 
optimal patient management strategies. Areas covered: A targeted literature 
review of studies published from 2010-2016 assessed adherence to CF therapies. 
Nineteen studies qualified for inclusion. Adherence to CF therapies was 
sub-optimal, and varied by treatment, mode of treatment administration, age, 
season, time and method of adherence measurement. Adherence to ivacaftor and 
inhaled antibiotics were reported higher than dornase alfa or hypertonic saline, 
oral pancreatic enzyme and vitamin supplements, and airway clearance therapy. 
Several patient, healthcare provider and treatment related factors influenced 
adherence. Sub-optimal adherence was shown to impact clinical and economic 
burden of the disease. Expert commentary: Higher adherence to CF therapies can 
lower disease burden, and improve patient outcomes. Healthcare providers and 
policy makers should devise patient-centered and caregiver-enabled interventions 
to improve adherence. Research on long-term adherence and outcomes associated 
with promising oral treatments such as CFTR modulators is needed. Identifying 
ways to overcome key barriers to adherence can positively affect outcomes 
associated with CF.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2017.1280399
PMID: 28107795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Heart Lung. 2019 Mar-Apr;48(2):141-147. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2018.09.010. Epub 
2018 Nov 5.

Mucoactive agents for adults with acute lung conditions: A systematic review.

Tarrant BJ(1), Maitre CL(2), Romero L(3), Steward R(2), Button BM(3), Thompson 
BR(3), Holland AE(4).

Author information:
(1)Physiotherapy Department, Alfred Health, The Alfred, 55 Commercial Rd, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; La Trobe University, Level 4, The Alfred 
Centre, 55 Commercial Rd, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia. Electronic 
address: b.tarrant@alfred.org.au.
(2)Physiotherapy Department, Alfred Health, The Alfred, 55 Commercial Rd, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.
(3)Physiotherapy Department, Alfred Health, The Alfred, 55 Commercial Rd, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; Monash University, The Alfred, 55 
Commercial Rd, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.
(4)Physiotherapy Department, Alfred Health, The Alfred, 55 Commercial Rd, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; La Trobe University, Level 4, The Alfred 
Centre, 55 Commercial Rd, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Inhaled mucoactive agents are used to enhance airway 
clearance, however efficacy and safety are unclear in adults with acute 
respiratory conditions.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed randomized controlled trials assessing 
respiratory function; safety; length of stay (LOS); mucus; radiology; and 
oxygenation.
RESULTS: No adverse events were reported for dornase alfa (n = 63), 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC, n = 50), ambroxol (n = 140), hypertonic saline (n = 33), 
heparin (n = 384), mannitol (n = 20) or isotonic saline. During invasive 
ventilation, NAC, dornase alfa and saline had no effect on mucus. 
Postoperatively, mucus characteristics improved with NAC (n = 10). Ambroxol 
lowered LOS (mean difference 4 days) and halved complications following lung 
carcinoma resection (n = 140). Heparin improved ventilator-free days (n = 130, 
mean difference 3.9-4.6) and intensive care LOS (n = 223, 3.2 days), but not 
ventilator-acquired pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: Dornase alfa, hypertonic saline and NAC were ineffective for 
atelectasis/mucus plugging while intubated. More data are required to support 
using NAC, ambroxol and heparin during acute illness.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2018.09.010
PMID: 30409442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 May 1;5(5):CD008649. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD008649.pub4.

Inhaled mannitol for cystic fibrosis.

Nevitt SJ(1), Thornton J(2), Murray CS(3), Dwyer T(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(2)Centre for Clinical Practice, National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence, Manchester, UK.
(3)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Institute of Inflammation and 
Repair, University of Manchester and University Hospital of South Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(4)Central Clinical School, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.
(5)Discipline of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Feb 09;2:CD008649.

BACKGROUND: Several agents are used to clear secretions from the airways of 
people with cystic fibrosis. Mannitol increases mucociliary clearance, but its 
exact mechanism of action is unknown. The dry powder formulation of mannitol may 
be more convenient and easier to use compared with established agents which 
require delivery via a nebuliser. Phase III trials of inhaled dry powder 
mannitol for the treatment of cystic fibrosis have been completed and it is now 
available in Australia and some countries in Europe. This is an update of a 
previous review.
OBJECTIVES: To assess whether inhaled dry powder mannitol is well tolerated, 
whether it improves the quality of life and respiratory function in people with 
cystic fibrosis and which adverse events are associated with the treatment.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders 
Group Trials Register which comprises references identified from comprehensive 
electronic databases, handsearching relevant journals and abstracts from 
conferences. Date of last search: 12 December 2019.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised controlled studies comparing mannitol with 
placebo, active inhaled comparators (for example, hypertonic saline or dornase 
alfa) or with no treatment.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Authors independently assessed studies for 
inclusion, carried out data extraction and assessed the risk of bias in included 
studies. The quality of the evidence was assessed using GRADE.
MAIN RESULTS: Six studies (reported in 36 unique publications) were included 
with a total of 784 participants. Duration of treatment in the included studies 
ranged from 12 days to six months, with open-label treatment for an additional 
six months in two of the studies. Five studies compared mannitol with control (a 
very low dose of mannitol or non-respirable mannitol) and the final study 
compared mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus dornase alfa. Two 
large studies had a similar parallel design and provided data for 600 
participants, which could be pooled where data for a particular outcome and time 
point were available. The remaining studies had much smaller sample sizes 
(ranging from 22 to 95) and data could not be pooled due to differences in 
design, interventions and population. Pooled evidence from the two large 
parallel studies was judged to be of low to moderate quality and from the 
smaller studies was judged to be of low to very low quality. In all studies, 
there was an initial test to see if participants tolerated mannitol, with only 
those who could tolerate the drug being randomised; therefore, the study results 
are not applicable to the cystic fibrosis population as a whole. While the 
published papers did not provide all the data required for our analysis, 
additional unpublished data were provided by the drug's manufacturer and the 
author of one of the studies. Pooling the large parallel studies comparing 
mannitol to control, up to and including six months, lung function (forced 
expiratory volume at one second) measured in both mL and % predicted was 
significantly improved in the mannitol group compared to the control group 
(moderate-quality evidence). Beneficial results were observed in these studies 
in adults and in both concomitant dornase alfa users and non-users in these 
studies. In the smaller studies, statistically significant improvements in lung 
function were also observed in the mannitol groups compared to the 
non-respirable mannitol groups; however, we judged this evidence to be of low to 
very low quality. For the comparisons of mannitol and control, we found no 
consistent differences in health-related quality of life in any of the domains 
except for burden of treatment, which was less for mannitol up to four months in 
the two pooled studies of a similar design; this difference was not maintained 
at six months. It should be noted that the tool used to measure health-related 
quality of life was not designed to assess mucolytics and pooling of the 
age-appropriate tools (as done in some of the included studies) may not be valid 
so results were judged to be low to very low quality and should be interpreted 
with caution. Cough, haemoptysis, bronchospasm, pharyngolaryngeal pain and 
post-tussive vomiting were the most commonly reported side effects in both 
treatment groups. Where rates of adverse events could be compared, statistically 
no significant differences were found between mannitol and control groups; 
although some of these events may have clinical relevance for people with CF. 
For the comparisons of mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus 
dornase alfa, very low-quality evidence from a 12-week cross-over study of 28 
participants showed no statistically significant differences in the recorded 
domains of health-related quality of life or measures of lung function. Cough 
was the most common side effect in the mannitol alone arm but there was no 
occurrence of cough in the dornase alfa alone arm and the most commonly reported 
reason of withdrawal from the mannitol plus dornase alfa arm was pulmonary 
exacerbations. In terms of secondary outcomes of the review (pulmonary 
exacerbations, hospitalisations, symptoms, sputum microbiology), evidence 
provided by the included studies was more limited. For all comparisons, no 
consistent statistically significant and clinically meaningful differences were 
observed between mannitol and control treatments (including dornase alfa).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is moderate-quality evidence to show that treatment 
with mannitol over a six-month period is associated with an improvement in some 
measures of lung function in people with cystic fibrosis compared to control. 
There is low to very low-quality evidence suggesting no difference in quality of 
life for participants taking mannitol compared to control. This review provides 
very low-quality evidence suggesting no difference in lung function or quality 
of life comparing mannitol to dornase alfa alone and to mannitol plus dornase 
alfa. The clinical implications from this review suggest that mannitol could be 
considered as a treatment in cystic fibrosis; but further research is required 
in order to establish who may benefit most and whether this benefit is sustained 
in the longer term. Furthermore, studies comparing its efficacy against other 
(established) mucolytic therapies need to be undertaken before it can be 
considered for mainstream practice.

Publisher: پیشینه: عوامل دارویی متعددی برای پاک کردن ترشحات از مجاری هوایی 
مبتلایان به فیبروز سیستیک استفاده می‌شوند. مانیتول پاکسازی موکوسیلیاری را افزایش 
می‌دهد، اما مکانیسم دقیق عملکرد آن ناشناخته است. فرمولاسیون پودر خشک مانیتول در 
مقایسه با عوامل تائید شده شده که توسط نبولایزر تجویز می‌شوند، ممکن است برای 
استفاده، راحت‌تر و آسان‌تر باشد. کارآزمایی‌های فاز III پودر خشک استنشاقی مانیتول 
برای درمان فیبروز سیستیک به پایان رسیده و هم اکنون در استرالیا و برخی از کشورهای 
اروپایی در دسترس قرار دارد. این یک به‌روزرسانی از یک مرور کاکرین است که قبلا 
منتشر شده است. اهداف: ارزیابی اینکه آیا پودر خشک استنشاقی مانیتول به خوبی تحمل 
می‌شود، آیا کیفیت زندگی و عملکرد تنفسی را در افراد مبتلا به فیبروز سیستیک بهبود 
می‌بخشد یا اینکه چه عوارض جانبی با درمان همراه است. روش‌های جست‌وجو: ما پایگاه 
ثبت کارآزمایی‌های گروه فیبروز کیستیک و اختلالات ژنتیکی در کاکرین را جست‌وجو 
کردیم که شامل منابع شناسایی‌شده از طریق جست‌وجوهای جامع در پایگاه‌های اطلاعاتی 
الکترونیکی، جست‌وجوهای دستی در مجلات مربوطه، کتاب‌های چکیده و مجموعه مقالات 
کنفرانس‌ها است. تاریخ آخرین جست‌وجو: 12 دسامبر 2019. معیارهای انتخاب: تمام 
مطالعات تصادفی‌سازی و کنترل شده که به مقایسه مانیتول با دارونما (placebo)، 
مقایسه کننده‌های استنشاقی فعال (به عنوان مثال، سالین هیپرتونیک یا دورناز آلفا) 
یا عدم درمان پرداختند. گردآوری و تجزیه‌وتحلیل داده‌ها: نویسندگان به‌طور مستقل از 
هم مطالعات را برای ورود ارزیابی کردند، داده‌‌ها را استخراج کرده و خطر سوگیری 
(bias) را در مطالعات وارد شده ارزیابی کردند. کیفیت شواهد با استفاده از GRADE 
ارزیابی شد. نتایج اصلی: شش مطالعه (گزارش شده در 36 مقاله تکی) با 784 شرکت‌کننده 
وارد شدند. مدت زمان درمان در مطالعات وارد شده، از 12 روز تا شش ماه متغیر بود، با 
درمان برچسب باز به مدت شش ماه بیشتر در دو مطالعه. پنج مطالعه مانیتول را با کنترل 
(دوز بسیار کمی از مانیتول یا مانیتول غیرقابل تنفس) مقایسه کرده و مطالعه نهایی به 
مقایسه مانیتول با دورناز آلفا به تنهایی و مانیتول به اضافه دورناز آلفا پرداخت. 
دو مطالعه بزرگ از یک طراحی موازی مشابه برخوردار بوده و داده‌ها را برای 600 
شرکت‌کننده ارائه کردند، که می‌توانست در جایی که داده‌ها برای یک پیامد و نقطه 
زمانی خاص در دسترس بودند، تجمیع شوند. مطالعات باقیمانده حجم نمونه‌های بسیار 
کمتری داشتند (از 22 تا 95) و به دلیل تفاوت‌ها در طراحی مطالعه، مداخلات و جمعیت، 
داده‌ها قابل تجمیع نبودند. شواهد تجمعی از دو مطالعه موازی بزرگ، كیفیت پایین تا 
متوسطی داشته و شواهد به دست آمده از مطالعات كوچكتر به نظر می‌رسید كه از كیفیت 
پائین تا بسیار پائینی برخوردار بودند. در تمام مطالعات، آزمایش اولیه‌ای وجود داشت 
تا مشخص شود که شرکت‌کنندگان قادر به تحمل مانیتول بودند یا خیر، فقط کسانی که 
می‌توانستند دارو را تحمل کنند، تصادفی‌سازی شدند؛بنابراین، نتایج مطالعه برای کل 
جمعیت مبتلا به فیبروز سیستیک کاربرد ندارند. در حالی که مقالات منتشر شده تمام 
داده‌های مورد نیاز را برای تجزیه‌و‌تحلیل ما ارائه نمی‌دهند، داده‌های منتشر نشده 
اضافی توسط سازنده دارو و نویسنده یکی از مطالعات ارائه شد. تجمیع مطالعات موازی 
بزرگ که به مقایسه مانیتول با کنترل، تا شش ماه و شامل 6 ماه پرداختند، نشان دادند 
که عملکرد ریه (حجم اجباری بازدمی در یک ثانیه)، اندازه‌گیری شده به هر دو صورت 
میلی‌لیتر و درصد پیش‌بینی شده، در گروه مانیتول نسبت به گروه کنترل به‌طور قابل 
توجهی بهبود یافت (شواهد با کیفیت متوسط). در این مطالعات نتایج مفیدی در بزرگسالان 
و در هر دو گروه مصرف کننده همزمان دورناز آلفا و کسانی که از آن استفاده نکردند، 
مشاهده شد. در مطالعات کوچکتر نیز پیشرفت‌های معنی‌داری از نظر آماری در عملکرد ریه 
در گروه مانیتول در مقایسه با گروه‌های مانیتول غیرقابل تنفس مشاهده شد. با این 
حال، این شواهد از کیفیت پایین تا بسیار پایینی برخوردار بودند. برای مقایسه‌های 
مانیتول و کنترل، ما تفاوت‌های پایداری را در کیفیت زندگی مرتبط با سلامت در هیچ یک 
از حوزه‌ها به جز بار (burden) درمان پیدا نکردیم، که برای مانیتول تا چهار ماه، در 
دو مطالعه تجمیع شده با طراحی مشابه، کمتر بود؛ این اختلاف در شش ماه باقی نماند. 
لازم به ذکر است که ابزار مورد استفاده برای سنجش کیفیت زندگی مرتبط با سلامت، که 
برای ارزیابی موکولیتیک‌ها و ادغام ابزارهای مناسب سن (همانطور که در برخی از 
مطالعات وارد شده انجام شد) طراحی نشده بود، ممکن است معتبر نباشد، بنابراین نتایج 
با کیفیت پایین تا بسیار پایین داوری شدند و باید با احتیاط تفسیر شوند. سرفه، 
هموپتیزی، برونکواسپاسم، درد فارنگولارنژیال و استفراغ پس از سرفه، شایع‌ترین عوارض 
جانبی در هر دو گروه درمانی بودند. در جایی که میزان عوارض جانبی با هم قابل مقایسه 
بودند، از نظر آماری تفاوت معنی‌داری بین مانیتول و گروه کنترل مشاهده نشد؛ اگرچه 
برخی از این حوادث ممکن است ارتباط بالینی برای افراد مبتلا به CF داشته باشند. 
برای مقایسه‌های مانیتول با دورناز آلفا به تنهایی و مانیتول به علاوه دورناز آلفا، 
شواهدی با کیفیت بسیار پایین از یک مطالعه متقاطع 12 هفته‌ای با 28 شرکت‌کننده به 
دست آمد که هیچ تفاوت آماری معنی‌داری را در حوزه‌های ثبت شده کیفیت زندگی مرتبط با 
سلامت یا معیارهای عملکرد ریه نشان ندادند. سرفه شایع‌ترین عارضه جانبی در بازوی 
مانیتول به تنهایی بود اما هیچ موردی از وقوع سرفه در بازوی دورناز آلفا به تنهایی 
وجود نداشت و شایع‌ترین دلیل خروج از بازوی مانیتول به علاوه دورناز آلفا، تشدید 
حملات ریوی گزارش شد. از نظر پیامدهای ثانویه مرور (تشدید حملات ریوی، بستری در 
بیمارستان، علائم، میکروبیولوژی خلط)، شواهد ارائه شده توسط مطالعات وارد شده، 
محدودتر بودند. برای همه مقایسه‌ها، هیچ تفاوتی معنی‌دار آماری پایداری و تفاوت 
بالینی قابل‌توجهی بین درمان‌های مانیتول و کنترل (از جمله دورناز آلفا) مشاهده 
نشد. نتیجه‌گیری‌های نویسندگان: شواهدی با کیفیت متوسط وجود دارد که نشان می‌دهد 
درمان با مانیتول در طول یک دوره شش ماهه، با بهبود برخی معیارهای عملکرد ریه در 
افراد مبتلا به فیبروز سیستیک در مقایسه با کنترل همراه است. شواهدی با کیفیت پایین 
تا بسیار پایین وجود دارد که نشان می‌دهد هیچ تفاوتی در کیفیت زندگی شرکت‌کنندگان 
تحت درمان با مانیتول در مقایسه با کنترل، وجود ندارد. این مرور شواهدی را با کیفیت 
بسیار پائین نشان می‌دهد که هیچ تفاوتی در عملکرد ریه یا کیفیت زندگی در مقایسه 
مانیتول با دورناز آلفا به تنهایی و با مانیتول به همراه دورناز آلفا وجود ندارد. 
کاربردهای بالینی این مرور پیشنهاد می‌کند که مانیتول می‌تواند به عنوان درمانی در 
فیبروز سیستیک در نظر گرفته شود؛ اما تحقیقات بیشتری لازم است تا مشخص شود چه کسی 
بیشترین نفع را از آن می‌برد و اینکه این سود در طولانی‌مدت پایدار است یا خیر. 
علاوه بر این، پیش از آنکه مانیتول در طبابت بالینی به کار گرفته شود، مطالعات 
مربوط به مقایسه اثربخشی آن در برابر سایر روش‌های درمانی موکولیتیک (اثبات شده) 
باید انجام شوند.

Copyright © 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008649.pub4
PMCID: PMC7195814
PMID: 32358807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sarah Nevitt has no potential conflict of 
interest to declare. Dr Murray was local principal investigator (and thus 
recruiting participants) for an inhaled mannitol study run by Pharmaxis. Her 
institution was paid on a per‐participant basis for participants recruited to 
the study, but she herself did not benefit financially for running the study. Dr 
Thornton was pharmacist at one site for a clinical study of inhaled mannitol in 
children and young people with CF in the UK. Dr Thornton’s main employment is 
with NICE, Centre for Guidelines. NICE Centre for Health Technology Evaluation, 
have published an appraisal of mannitol in CF. The Centre for Guidelines have 
published a guideline for the management of CF which includes mannitol. Dr 
Thornton is also a member of the GRADE working group. Tiffany Dwyer declares she 
has worked on a trial of hypertonic saline in people with cystic fibrosis and 
another trial in non‐cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Hypertonic saline is a 
mucolytic agent that works similarly to inhaled mannitol.


7. Trials. 2020 Jun 19;21(1):548. doi: 10.1186/s13063-020-04488-8.

Efficacy and safety of aerosolized intra-tracheal dornase alfa administration in 
patients with SARS-CoV-2-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): a 
structured summary of a study protocol for a randomised controlled trial.

Desilles JP(1)(2)(3), Gregoire C(4), Le Cossec C(5), Lambert J(5), Mophawe O(5), 
Losser MR(6), Lambiotte F(7), Le Tacon S(8), Cantier M(4), Engrand N(4), 
Trouiller P(4), Pottecher J(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Biological Resource Center, Interventional Neuroradiology Department, 
Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France. jpdesilles@for.paris.
(2)Laboratory of Vascular Translational Science, U1148 INSERM, Université de 
Paris, Paris, France. jpdesilles@for.paris.
(3)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. jpdesilles@for.paris.
(4)Intensive Care Department, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France.
(5)Clinical Research Unit, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France.
(6)CHRU Nancy, Pôle d'Anesthésie-Réanimation, 29 Avenue de Lattre de Tassigny, 
54000, Nancy, France.
(7)Service de Réanimation Polyvalente, Centre Hospitalier de Valenciennes, 
Avenue Désandrouin, 59322, Valenciennes, France.
(8)CHR Metz-Thionville-Site de Mercy, Service de Réanimation Polyvalente, 1 
Allée du Château, 57350, Ars-Laquenexy, France.
(9)Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Service 
d'Anesthésie-Réanimation Chirurgicale, 1 Avenue Molière, 67098, Strasbourg, 
France.
(10)Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, Fédération de Médecine 
Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), EA3072, Strasbourg, France.

OBJECTIVES: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) may 
trigger severe pneumonia in coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19) patients 
through release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and recruitment 
of neutrophils in the lungs. Activated neutrophils induce inflammation and 
severe alveolar injury by releasing neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). The 
backbones of many DAMPs and NETs are made of extracellular, cell-free DNA 
decorated with highly toxic compounds such as elastase, myeloperoxidase and 
citrullinated histones. Dornase alfa is a FDA-approved recombinant human DNAse 1 
for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, which cleaves extracellular DNA and may 
break up cell-free DNA, loosening sticky mucus in the distal airways and 
reducing NETs-induced toxicity on alveolar pneumocytes. The COVIDornase trial 
intends to define the impact of aerosolized intra-tracheal dornase alfa 
administration on the severity and progression of acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) in COVID-19 patients. This drug might make lung mucus thinner 
and looser, promoting improved clearance of secretions and reduce extracellular 
double-stranded DNA-induced hyperinflammation in alveoli, preventing further 
damage to the lungs.
TRIAL DESIGN: COVIDornase is a prospective, randomized, controlled, 2-arm (1:1 
ratio), multicentric, open-label clinical trial.
PARTICIPANTS: The study will recruit mechanically ventilated patients 
hospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU) in the recruiting centres (at the 
time of writing: The Rothschild foundation hospital in Paris, the Strasbourg 
university hospitals, and Metz-Thionville hospital) who have been diagnosed with 
COVID-19 and meet ARDS criteria.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: - Adult patient (age ≥ 18 years old); - Hospitalized in ICU; 
- With severe COVID-19 pneumonia and ARDS according to Berlin criteria 
(PaO2/FiO2 < 300 and PEEP > 5 cmH2O); - Intubated for less than 8 days; - With 
an anticipated duration of mechanical ventilation > 48 hours; - Carrier of an 
arterial catheter; - For whom 4 PaO2/FiO2 values over the preceding 24 hours are 
available; NON-INCLUSION CRITERIA: - Known hypersensitivity to dornase alfa or 
any of its excipients; - Pregnant or breastfeeding status; - Patient under legal 
protection.
INTERVENTION AND COMPARATOR: Intervention 1, Study group Dornase alfa 
(Pulmozyme®, Roche, Switzerland) will be administered by aerosol, at a dose of 
2500 IU twice daily, 12 hours apart, for 7 consecutive days, using a vibrating 
mesh nebulizer (Aerogen Solo®, Aerogen, Ireland). The remainder of the 
management will be performed in accordance with good clinical practice, 
including mechanical ventilation (protective ventilation, PEEP > 5 cmH2O, 
tracheal balloon pressure check every 4 hours or automatic device, 30° head of 
the bed elevation, tidal volume 6-8mL/kg, plateau pressure < 30 cmH2O), 
neuromuscular blockers if necessary, prone position if PaO2/FiO2 < 150, early 
enteral nutrition, glycemic control and a sedation protocol based on the RASS 
score. Intervention 2, Comparator Patients will receive usual care in accordance 
with good practice (as detailed above), without aerosols.
MAIN OUTCOMES: The primary outcome is the occurrence of at least one grade 
improvement between D0 (inclusion) and D7 in the ARDS scale severity (Berlin 
criteria). For instance from "severe" to "moderate" or from "moderate" to 
"mild".
RANDOMISATION: All consecutive patients meeting the inclusion criteria will be 
randomised 1:1 using an eCRF-based, computer-generated randomisation table, 
either to the dornase alfa arm or to the control arm. An interim analysis will 
be performed after inclusion of 20 patients. Inclusions may be stopped at the 
interim analysis per data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) advice, if 
statistical analyses conclude on the futility or efficacy of the intervention or 
by other DSMB decision.
BLINDING (MASKING): The participants and caregivers will not be blinded to study 
group assignment. Those assessing the outcomes will be blinded to study group 
assignment.
NUMBERS TO BE RANDOMISED (SAMPLE SIZE): Fifty patients will be randomized to 
each group, 100 patients in total.
TRIAL STATUS: Protocol version number 2, April 29th, 2020. Recruitment is 
ongoing. The trial started recruitment on the 21st April 2020. We estimate 
recruitment will finish August 21st 2020.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was registered in ClinicalTrials.gov on 21 April 
2020, updated on 8 May 2020. Trial registration number is NCT04355364.
FULL PROTOCOL: The full protocol is attached as an additional file, accessible 
from the Trials website (Additional file 1). In the interest in expediting 
dissemination of this material, the familiar formatting has been eliminated. 
This Letter serves as a summary of the key elements of the full protocol.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-020-04488-8
PMCID: PMC7303591
PMID: 32560746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


8. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2012 Nov;18(6):609-14. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e328358d51f.

Dornase alfa (Pulmozyme).

Wagener JS(1), Kupfer O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine and 
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. 
jeff.wagener@ucdenver.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Dornase alfa (Pulmozyme) is one of the most commonly used 
medications to treat the lung disease of cystic fibrosis (CF). As other 
respiratory medications have entered the clinical market, understanding the 
proper use and indication for dornase alfa is increasingly important. In 
addition, dornase alfa is being used to treat other medical conditions. This 
review covers recent publications and expanding indications.
RECENT FINDINGS: Understanding dornase alfa's mechanism of action and impact on 
the pathophysiology of CF leads to an improved understanding of optimal therapy, 
ways to improve adherence and use with other medications. Most importantly, 
routine use of dornase alfa is associated with improved lung function and 
survival in patients with CF. Outside of CF, potential uses include treating 
patients with empyema or on mechanical ventilation.
SUMMARY: Dornase alfa has been available for clinical use for nearly 20 years 
and is one of the most commonly used medications in patients with CF. Routine 
use is associated with a reduced rate of pulmonary deterioration and improved 
survival. Recent clinical reports suggest that dornase alfa may have clinical 
value with other medical problems such as complicated pneumonia and mechanically 
ventilated patients with atelectasis.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e328358d51f
PMID: 22990660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Apr 4;4:CD001127. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001127.pub3.

Dornase alfa for cystic fibrosis.

Yang C(1), Chilvers M, Montgomery M, Nolan SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Respiratory Medicine, BC Children's 
Hospital, 4480 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6H 3V4.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Sep 06;9:CD001127.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(3):CD001127.

BACKGROUND: Dornase alfa is currently used as a mucolytic to treat pulmonary 
disease (the major cause of morbidity and mortality) in cystic fibrosis. It 
reduces mucus viscosity in the lungs, promoting improved clearance of 
secretions. This is an update of a previously published review.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the use of dornase alfa in cystic fibrosis is 
associated with improved mortality and morbidity compared to placebo or other 
medications that improve airway clearance, and to identify any adverse events 
associated with its use.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders 
Group Trials Register which comprises references identified from comprehensive 
electronic database searches, handsearching relevant journals and abstracts from 
conferences. Date of the most recent search of the Group's Cystic Fibrosis 
Register: 30 November 2015.Clinicaltrials.gov was also searched to identify 
unpublished or ongoing trials. Date of most recent search: 28 November 2015.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials 
comparing dornase alfa to placebo, standard therapy or other medications that 
improve airway clearance.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Authors independently assessed trials against the 
inclusion criteria; two authors carried out analysis of methodological quality 
and data extraction.
MAIN RESULTS: The searches identified 54 trials, of which 19 (including a total 
of 2565 participants) met our inclusion criteria. Three additional papers 
examined the healthcare cost from one of the clinical trials. Fifteen trials 
compared dornase alfa to placebo or no dornase alfa treatment (2447 
participants); two compared daily dornase to hypertonic saline (32 
participants); one compared daily dornase alfa with hypertonic saline and 
alternate day dornase alfa (48 participants); one compared dornase alfa to 
mannitol and the combination of both drugs (38 participants). Trial duration 
varied from six days to three years.Compared to placebo, forced expiratory 
volume at one second improved in the intervention groups, with significant 
differences at one, three, six months and two years. There was also a 
significant improvement in lung clearance index at one month. There was a 
decrease in pulmonary exacerbations compared to placebo in trials of longer 
duration. The quality of the evidence from placebo-controlled trials was 
moderate to high for outcomes of lung function and pulmonary exacerbations. 
Limited, low quality evidence was available for changes in quality of life from 
baseline. One trial that examined the cost of care, including the cost of 
dornase alfa, found that the cost savings from dornase alfa offset 18% to 38% of 
the medication costs.The results for trials comparing dornase alfa to other 
medications that improve airway clearance (hypertonic saline or mannitol) were 
mixed, with one trial showing a greater improvement in forced expiratory volume 
at one second for dornase alfa compared to hypertonic saline, and three trials 
finding no difference between medications. In the only trial to assess the 
combination of dornase alfa with another medication compared to dornase alone, 
there was no benefit seen with the combination of dornase alfa and mannitol. 
Evidence of dornase alfa compared to other medications was limited and the 
open-label design of the trials may have induced bias, therefore the quality of 
the evidence was judged to be low.Dornase alfa did not cause significantly more 
adverse effects, except voice alteration and rash.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is evidence to show that, compared with placebo, 
therapy with dornase alfa improves lung function in people with cystic fibrosis 
in trials lasting one month to two years. There was a decrease in pulmonary 
exacerbations in trials of six months or longer. Voice alteration and rash 
appear to be the only adverse events reported with increased frequency in 
randomised controlled trials. There is not enough evidence to firmly conclude if 
dornase alfa is superior to hyperosmolar agents in improving lung function.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001127.pub3
PMID: 27043279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Dornase Alfa.

Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National 
Library of Medicine (US); 2006–.
2018 Dec 3.

No information is available on the clinical use of dornase alpha (hamster) 
during breastfeeding. Because it is a large protein molecule with a molecular 
weight of about 37,000, the amount in milk is likely to be very low and 
absorption is unlikely because it is probably destroyed in the infant's 
gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 29999662